DOC: verifying bug existence and fixes - replacement for PR 17851 (#21152)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/user/how-to-verify-bug.rst

.. _how-to-verify-bug:

##############################################################################
Verifying bugs and bug fixes in NumPy
##############################################################################

In this how-to you will learn how to:

- Verify the existence of a NumPy bug
- Verify the fix, if any, made for the bug

While you walk through the verification process, you will learn how to: 

- Set up a Python virtual environment (``virtualenv``)
- Install appropriate versions of NumPy, first to see the bug in action, then to verify its fix

`Issue 16354 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/16354>`_ is used as an example.

This issue was:

.. code-block:: none

    Title:

>     `np.polymul return type is np.float64 or np.complex128 when given an
>     all-zero argument`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ``np.polymul return type is np.float64 or np.complex128 when given an
    all-zero argument``
```

    np.polymul returns an object with type np.float64 when one argument is all
    zero, and both arguments have type np.int64 or np.float32. Something
    similar happens with all zero np.complex64 giving result type np.complex128.
    
    This doesn't happen with non-zero arguments; there the result is as 
    expected.
    
    This bug isn't present in np.convolve.
    

>     Reproducing code example:

Reviewer 2: Should use "::" for code blocks and then indent them.

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> np.__version__
    '...' # 1.18.4
    >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
    >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('int64')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('...') # float64
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype
    dtype('...') # float64
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype
    dtype('...') # complex128

Whenever the zero array, ``z`` in the example above, is one of the arguments to `np.polymul`, an incorrect ``dtype`` is returned.

******************************************************************************
4. Verify the fix, if any, in the latest version of NumPy
******************************************************************************

If the issue report for your bug is still open, you are welcome to submit a fix.

In this case, however, the issue was resolved by `PR 17577 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17577>`_ and is now closed. So you can try to verify the fix.

To verify the fix:

1. Uninstall the version of NumPy in which the bug still exists:

>     pip uninstall numpy 

Reviewer 2: Might make these code blocks.

2. Install the latest version of NumPy.

    pip install numpy

> 3. Run the same code you used to verify the bug and confirm that the fix has been applied.

Reviewer 2: This shows up with strange indentation.

##############################################################################
Verifying bugs and bug fixes in NumPy
##############################################################################

In this how-to you will learn how to:

- Verify the existence of a NumPy bug
- Verify the fix, if any, made for the bug

While you walk through the verification process, you will learn how to: 

- Set up a Python virtual environment (virtualenv)
- Install appropriate versions of NumPy, first to see the bug in action, then to verify its fix

`Issue 16354 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/16354>`_ is used as an example.

This issue was:

.. code-block:: none

    Title:
    `np.polymul return type is np.float64 or np.complex128 when given an
    all-zero argument`

    np.polymul returns an object with type np.float64 when one argument is all
    zero, and both arguments have type np.int64 or np.float32. Something
    similar happens with all zero np.complex64 giving result type np.complex128.
    
    This doesn't happen with non-zero arguments; there the result is as 
    expected.
    
    This bug isn't present in np.convolve.
    
    Reproducing code example:

>     >>> import numpy as np

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    >>> import numpy as np # doctest: +ELLIPSIS
```

Reviewer: I believe this is the default, but it is easier to be explicit

    >>> np.__version__

>     '1.18.4'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    '...'
```

    >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
    >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('int64')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype

>     dtype('float64')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype('...') # Was float64
```

    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype

>     dtype('float64')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype('...') # Was float32
```

The issue is that the doctests will run with the corrected version of `numpy` so this will fail (by correctly returning `float32`).

    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype

>     dtype('complex128')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype('...') # Was complex128
```

    Numpy/Python version information:
    >>> import sys, numpy; print(numpy.__version__, sys.version)

>     1.18.4 3.7.5 (default, Nov  7 2019, 10:50:52) 
>     [GCC 8.3.0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ... # 1.18.4 3.7.5 (default, Nov  7 2019, 10:50:52) [GCC 8.3.0]
```

******************************************************************************
2. Install the NumPy version in which the bug was reported
******************************************************************************

The report references NumPy version 1.18.4, so that is the version you need to install in this case.

This is a fairly simple bug, so a pre-built wheel installed in your virtual environment via `pip` will suffice::

    pip install numpy==1.18.4

More complex bugs may require you to build the NumPy version referenced in the issue report. To learn how to do that, visit :ref:`Building from source <building-from-source>`. 

******************************************************************************
3. Confirm that the bug exists
******************************************************************************

The reporter's claim for issue 16354 is simple enough: the wrong ``dtype`` is returned if one of the inputs
of the method `numpy.polymul` is a zero array. 

To verify the existence of the bug:

Start a Python terminal, enter the code shown in the bug report, and see if you can reproduce the bug::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> np.__version__

>     '1.18.4'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    '...' # 1.18.4
```

    >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
    >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('int64')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype

>     dtype('float64')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype('...') # float64
```

    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype

>     dtype('float64')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype('...') # float64
```

    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype

>     dtype('complex128')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dtype('...') # complex128
```

Whenever the zero array, ``z`` in the example above, is one of the arguments to `np.polymul`, an incorrect ``dtype`` is returned.

******************************************************************************
4. Verify the fix, if any, in the latest version of NumPy
******************************************************************************

If the issue report for your bug is still open, you are welcome to submit a fix.

In this case, however, the issue was resolved by `PR 17577 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17577>`_ and is now closed. So you can try to verify the fix.

To verify the fix:

1. Uninstall the version of NumPy in which the bug still exists:

    pip uninstall numpy 

2. Install the latest version of NumPy.

    pip install numpy

3. Run the same code you used to verify the bug and confirm that the fix has been applied.
::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> np.__version__

>     '1.18.4'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    '...' # 1.18.4
```

    expected.*

    *This bug isn't present in np.convolve.*

    **Reproducing code example**::

        >>> import numpy as np
        >>> np.__version__
        '1.18.4'
        >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
        >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
        dtype('int64')
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype
        dtype('float64')
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype
        dtype('float64')
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype
        dtype('complex128')
        Numpy/Python version information:
        >>> import sys, numpy; print(numpy.__version__, sys.version)
        1.18.4 3.7.5 (default, Nov  7 2019, 10:50:52) [GCC 8.3.0]

*******************************
1. Set up a virtual environment
*******************************

Create a new directory, enter into it, and set up a virtual environment using
your preferred method. For example, this is how to do it using ``virtualenv``:

::

    virtualenv venv_np_bug
    source venv_np_bug/bin/activate

> This ensures your existing Python/NumPy installation will not be altered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures the system/global/default Python/NumPy installation will not be altered.
```

**********************************************************
2. Install the NumPy version in which the bug was reported
**********************************************************

The report references NumPy version 1.18.4, so that is the version you need to
install in this case.

> This is a fairly simple bug, so a pre-built wheel installed in your virtual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this bug is tied to a release and not a specific commit, a pre-built wheel installed in your virtual
```

environment via `pip` will suffice::

    pip install numpy==1.18.4

> More complex bugs may require you to build the NumPy version referenced in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some bugs may require you to build the NumPy version referenced in the
```

issue report. To learn how to do that, visit
:ref:`Building from source <building-from-source>`.

> ******************************
> 3. Confirm that the bug exists
> ******************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
********************
3. Reproduce the bug
********************
```

> The reporter's claim for issue
> `#16354 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/16354>`_ is: the wrong ``dtype``
> is returned if one of the inputs of the method `numpy.polymul` is a zero array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue reported in
`#16354 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/16354>`_ is that the wrong ``dtype``
is returned if one of the inputs of the method `numpy.polymul` is a zero array.
```

> To verify the existence of the bug, start a Python terminal, enter the code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reproduce the bug, start a Python terminal, enter the code snippet
```

> shown in the bug report, and see if you can reproduce it::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shown in the bug report, and ensure that the results match those in the issue::
```

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> np.__version__
    '...' # 1.18.4
    >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
    >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('int64')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('...') # float64
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype
    dtype('...') # float64
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype
    dtype('...') # complex128

> Whenever the zero array, ``z`` in the example above, is one of the arguments to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As reported, whenever the zero array, ``z`` in the example above, is one of the arguments to
```

`numpy.polymul`, an incorrect ``dtype`` is returned.

> *********************************************************
> 4. Verify the fix, if any, in the latest version of NumPy
> *********************************************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
****************************************************
4. Check for fixes in in the latest version of NumPy
****************************************************
```

> If the issue report for your bug is still open, you are welcome to submit a fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the issue report for your bug has not yet been resolved, further action or patches need to be submitted.
```

In this case, however, the issue was resolved by
`PR 17577 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17577>`_ and is now closed. So
you can try to verify the fix.

To verify the fix:

1. Uninstall the version of NumPy in which the bug still exists::

    pip uninstall numpy

2. Install the latest version of NumPy::

    pip install numpy

> 3. In your Python terminal, run the same code you used to verify the bug and
>    confirm that the fix has been applied::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In your Python terminal, run the reported code snippet used to verify the existence of the bug and
   confirm that issue has been resolved::
```

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> np.__version__
    '...' # 1.18.4
    >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
    >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('int64')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype
    dtype('int64')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype
    dtype('float32')
    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype
    dtype('complex64')

> Note that the correct ``dtype`` is now returned even when the zero array is one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the correct ``dtype`` is now returned even when a zero array is one
```

of the arguments to `numpy.polymul`.

> ***********************************************************************
> 5. Support the NumPy development community by verifying and fixing bugs
> ***********************************************************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*********************************************************
5. Support NumPy development by verifying and fixing bugs
*********************************************************
```

> Go to the `NumPy GitHub issues page <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues>`_
> and see if you can confirm the existence of any other bugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the `NumPy GitHub issues page <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues>`_
and see if you can confirm the existence of any other bugs which have not been confirmed yet.
```

> Then comment on the issue to confirm. Doing this alerts the NumPy developers
> that more than one user can reproduce the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comments about the reproducibility of bugs alerts the NumPy developers
that more than one user can reproduce the issue.
```

    similar happens with all zero np.complex64 giving result type
    np.complex128.*

    *This doesn't happen with non-zero arguments; there the result is as
    expected.*

    *This bug isn't present in np.convolve.*

    **Reproducing code example**::

        >>> import numpy as np
        >>> np.__version__
        '1.18.4'
        >>> a = np.array([1,2,3])
        >>> z = np.array([0,0,0])
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), a.astype(np.int64)).dtype
        dtype('int64')
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.int64), z.astype(np.int64)).dtype
        dtype('float64')
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.float32), z.astype(np.float32)).dtype
        dtype('float64')
        >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype
        dtype('complex128')
        Numpy/Python version information:
        >>> import sys, numpy; print(numpy.__version__, sys.version)
        1.18.4 3.7.5 (default, Nov  7 2019, 10:50:52) [GCC 8.3.0]

*******************************
1. Set up a virtual environment
*******************************

Create a new directory, enter into it, and set up a virtual environment using

> your preferred method. For example, this is how to do it using ``virtualenv``:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
your preferred method. For example, this is how to do it using
``virtualenv`` on linux or macOS:
```

    >>> np.polymul(a.astype(np.complex64), z.astype(np.complex64)).dtype
    dtype('complex64')

Note that the correct ``dtype`` is now returned even when a zero array is one of
the arguments to `numpy.polymul`.

*********************************************************

> 1. Support NumPy development by verifying and fixing bugs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Support NumPy development by verifying and fixing bugs
```

Although actually I'd really rather not have the numbering in the titles, I don't think they're there anywhere else in the docs.

Reviewer 4: In this case I'd actually advocate for the numbering, I think it makes the instructions easier to follow.
